Package section zipf updates (#341)
merely-useful/merely-useful.github.io: py-rse/package-py.Rmd

This material is based in part on [Python 102][python-102] by [Ashwin Srinath][srinath-ashwin].

## How can I create an installable Python package? {#py-rse-package-py-package}

A package is essentially a few Python scripts in a specific directory structure
coupled with installation instructions for the computer.
Python packages can come from various sources.
Many that you will use are part of the standard distribution,
but packages can be created by anyone
and there are thousands of that can be downloaded and installed from online repositories.
Note that you will sometimes hear packages referred to as "modules".
These two words are often used interchangeably.
Technically,
a package is a folder that contains modules (scripts),
which in turn contains functions (code).

A general package folder hierarchy looks like this

```text
pkg_name
├── pkg_name
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── module1.py
│   └── module2.py
├── README.md
└── setup.py
```

which in our case would become

```text
zipfs_law
├── zipfs_law
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── collate.py
│   ├── countwords.py

> │   ├── mymodule.py

Reviewer: It occurs to me that if we are packaging `zipfs_law` for release then we probably want a better / more realistic name for `mymodule.py`. Perhaps `csv_tools.py`?

Author: Opened #341

│   └── plotcounts.py
├── README.md
└── setup.py
```

It might initially be confusing
that the top level directory has the same name as the package directory containing the `.py`-files.
You could change the name of the top level folder to whatever you want,
but it is often convenient that this is the same as the package directory.
If you change the name of the package directory,
this will change the name of your package.
You could also place your package_directory inside a subdirectory,
such as `src` or `py`,
but this would require some changes to the setup instructions later on,

> so we will stick to the conventional folder hierarchy above.

Author: Ok, I will wait until we have finished the discussion of which is preferred of `pkg_name/pkg_name` or `pkg_name/src/pkg_name`

The folder contains a Python file with a special name: `__init__.py`.
This was a requirement before Python 3.3,
and is now included as a convention

> or to execute code upon package import.

Author: I think the original intent with this sentence is that some people just add an empty `__init__.py` because that is how it used to be and some people add an `__init__.py` specifically to execute the code it contains on import.

Python has several ways to build an installable package.
We will show how to use [setuptools][setuptools],
which is the lowest common denominator.
The setuptools approach we describe below will
allow everyone,
regardless of what python distribution they use,
to easily use your package.
To use `setuptools`,
we must create a file called `setup.py` in the directory *above* the root directory of the package:
The file `setup.py` must have exactly that name,
and must contain these lines:

```python
from setuptools import setup

setup(
    name='zipfs_law',
    version='0.1',
    author='Your Name',
    packages=['zipfs_law']
)
```

We can add additional information later,
but this is enough to be able to install the package
from the local copy source code using standard tools!
To install this package,
we could `cd` to the same directory that contains `setup.py`
and type `pip install .`
(where `.` references the current directory).
However,
it is considered good practice to create a separate, virtual Python environment
when installing our own packages,
since this will allow us to test how your package installs in a clean Python environment,

> rather that the current state of your primary Python environment.

Author: Yes I think CI should also cover this. Personally, I would create a clean env for my package anyways when I am developing it, but we could reword (or I could be enlighten on why I don't need to do this).

Instead of putting all these Python files in the current directory,
they are located in certain directories elsewhere on your file system,
where Python knows to search for them.
Just as the `PATH` environment in the shell contains a list of directories
that the shell searches for programs it can execute,
the Python variable `sys.path` contains a list of the directories to search.
We can see the which directories Python looks in,
by opening the Python interpreter and typing the following.

```python
import sys

sys.path
```

If you are using the Anaconda distribution of Python
and you run this script from your desktop,
the `sys.path` list will contain the following items
(this might differ slightly on different systems):

```
['',
'/Users/tpratchett/anaconda3/lib/python36.zip',
'/Users/tpratchett/anaconda3/lib/python3.6',
'/Users/tpratchett/anaconda3/lib/python3.6/lib-dynload',
'/Users/tpratchett/anaconda3/lib/python3.6/site-packages']
```

The first will be your current directory - a Python environment
always looks there first -
and the rest are system paths for
the Python installation you are using.

To install a package simply means to copy the contents of the

> package in some form into one of the directories that Python will search in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Installing a package means that the contents of the package are copied
into one of the directories that Python will search in.
```

2. Run `pip list`. What packages are installed?
3. Run the `showpath.py` script from the earlier section, and note that the paths are different from your
base environment where you looked for packages.  They probably look like `/Users/pterry/envs/test/lib/python-3.7/site-packages`.
4. Pick a package you know you have installed in your base environment—pick `pytest` if you can't think of one—and
try to import it in a Python interpreter.  Can it be found?
5. Deactivate the environment and try again.

### Exercise: Hello, Zipf!

Put a statement

```python
print("Hello, Zipf!")
```
at the end of `zipf.py`.

1. What happens when you start Python interactively and import the
module with the command `import zipf`?
2. Python caches modules that have been imported.  What happens if you
type `import zipf` again?

### Exercise: What is `__name__` in different contexts?

1. Start an interactive Python interpreter, and run `print(__name__)`.
What do you get?
2. Add the statement `print(__name__)` to the end of the file `zipf.py`
and from the Python interpreter, run `import zipf`.  What is the name
printed?

> ### Exercise: Turn `use.py` into a unit test

Reviewer 2: The next chapter will be unit testing, not before. So no reference to unit testing should be included.

1. Add the line `RELATIVE_ERROR = 0.05` to `__init__.py`;
2. Now we can remove the line definining `RELATIVE_ERROR` from `check.py`
and `generate.py`, but;
3. We still need to import that definition somehow, or else those functions
won't know what a `RELATIVE_ERROR` is; add the line `from . import RELATIVE_ERROR`
to each so that it is visible.  When we don't specify a file, it imports the
definition from `__init__.py` (just as `import zipfpy` will read the `__init__.py`)
4. Run the test suite with `pytest`

We haven't shortened the code any here—we've replaced a `RELATIVE_ERROR = 0.05`
with an `from . import RELATIVE_ERROR`—but now the constant is defined in only
one location so we don't have to worry about editing it in one location and that
value being out of sync in the other.

### Exercise: Importing from within __init__.py

Since any code that does an `import zipf` will read `__init__.py`, it
can be convenient to put import statments in `__init__.py` itself, to
ensure that some key definitions are readily available when the package
is imported.

We'll try that here:

1. Add the lines `from .generate import *` and `from .check import *` to
`zipfpy/__init__.py`.

> 2. In the test suite, you can now just call `import zipfpy` and refer to,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In the test suite, you can now call `import zipfpy` and refer to,
```

Reviewer 2: "just" :wink:

Reviewer 2: Also, this could be moved to the correctness chapter, since this comes after the packaging chapter.
